date: 27 Nov 2010 10:32pm
categories: mac
read more: More&#8230;
summary: How to set up server-side email on the Mac, so web pages can send email.

# Server-Side Email on OS X

This will make it so that you can send email from Terminal sessions, server-side scripts, and web pages.  We are also going to tell it to route email through your ISP's email servers: Gmail, in this case.

Works on: **OS 10.5 and 10.6**

## Postfix

Conveniently, the powerful and popular SMTP server, Postfix, is already installed on OS X.  In this example, we're going to tell it to route outgoing email through your Gmail account.

Edit Postfix's config file:

<pre>:::shell-unix-generic
sudo nano /etc/postfix/main.cf
</pre>

Press `Esc-/` to go to the bottom of the file. Add the block of text below to the bottom, changing `relayhost` to your outgoing SMTP-server address.  In this example, we are using port 587, which TLS-encrypted mail travels through.  Verify your ISP supports TLS and port 587.  Nearly all do.

<pre>:::shell-unix-generic
relayhost = smtp.gmail.com:587
smtp_sasl_auth_enable = yes
smtp_use_tls = yes
smtp_enforce_tls = yes
smtp_sasl_security_options =
smtp_sasl_tls_security_options =
smtp_sasl_tls_verified_security_options =
smtp_tls_loglevel = 2
# Log is here /var/log/mail.log  
smtp_sasl_password_maps = hash:/etc/postfix/smtp_sasl_passwords
smtp_tls_per_site = hash:/etc/postfix/smtp_tls_sites
tls_random_source = dev:/dev/urandom
</pre>

Create the file to hold login credentials:

<pre>:::shell-unix-generic
sudo nano /etc/postfix/smtp_sasl_passwords
</pre>

Add this line to it, changing it to match your SMTP server address and credentials:

<pre>:::shell-unix-generic
smtp.gmail.com username:password
</pre>

Edit this file:

<pre>:::shell-unix-generic
sudo nano /etc/postfix/smtp_tls_sites
</pre>

Add this line to it, changing mail server accordingly:

<pre>:::shell-unix-generic
smtp.gmail.com MUST_NOPEERMATCH
</pre>

Run these commands:

<pre>:::shell-unix-generic
cd /etc/postfix
sudo chmod go-rx smtp_sasl_passwords
sudo postmap smtp_sasl_passwords
sudo postmap smtp_tls_sites
</pre>

## Test

Change email addresses to yours:

<pre>:::shell-unix-generic
echo "Hello" | mail -s "Test" me@domain.com
</pre>

The above may not work if your ISP requires a valid From address, so also try:

<pre>:::shell-unix-generic
printf "Subject: TestnHello" | sendmail -f me@domain.com me@domain.com
</pre>

Both of these worked with Gmail, in my case.

If things fail, tail out the log:

<pre>:::shell-unix-generic
tail -f /var/log/mail.log
</pre>

Send more email in a new Terminal tab while watching the logs.
