date: 10 Nov 2012 20:09pm
categories: mac
read more: More&#8230;
summary: You can get just about any video into Apple TV; you just have to know the rules and proper conversion techniques so that no quality is lost in conversion, the 5.1 soundtrack survives, and the conversion takes 2 minutes rather than 2 hours.

# How To Get Any Video Into iTunes and Apple TV Fast With No Quality Loss While Maintaining the 5.1 Soundtrack

## TL; DR

1. **Apple TV** - Set "Dolby Digital" to On rather than Auto.
2. **[MP4 Tools](http://www.emmgunn.com/mp4tools/mp4toolshome.html)** to convert.
    * Set "Device" to "Apple TV".
    * Choose "Pass Thru" for Video.
    * Choose "Pass Thru" for Audio.
      * If "Pass Thru" is grayed, the audio isn't compatible with ATV. Select "AAC 5.1".
    * Choose "Mux (soft)" for Subtitles.
3. **[Subler](http://code.google.com/p/subler/)** to add complete metadata and cover art into the video file.

That will _remux_ the video in mere minutes, which causes zero quality loss. It causes no lengthy, 2-hour-long, quality-reducing transcode (like HandBrake does).

Now that you have weeks of work summarized into three steps, what follows is the research leading up to the above steps. The process above succeeds for me 98% of the time.

## Myths

Myths I am busting with this post:

1. "I can't get some videos into iTunes & Apple TV."
2. "Conversion takes forever."
3. "Quality is lost with converting."
4. "Apple TV doesn't do 5.1 soundtracks."

## Glossary

Some vocabulary first:

* **Container** - Sometimes "Format" or "Container Format". The file itself. Examples of container formats: AVI, MPG, MP4, MKV, WebM
* **Streams** - A container file can have essentially 3 types of streams inside it: Video, Audio, and Subtitles.
* **Channel** - Audio streams can be further broken up into channels. Stereo audio uses 2 channels. 5.1 audio uses 6 channels.
* **Codec** - Sometimes "Compression Format". The method by which the video or audio streams are compressed.
  * Video Codecs: mp2v, h264, vp8
  * Audio Codecs: DTS, AAC, AC3

It's very important to understand the difference between the two types of conversion methods, Transcoding and Remuxing:

* **Transcoding** - Sometimes called "re-encoding". Converting a stream to a different codec, bitrate (compression), or resolution. This means taking a fresh sample of every single frame. Transcoding is time-consuming and, with lossy codecs, causes generation-loss.
* **Demuxing** - Breaking a container into its component streams. Example: A video called `somevideo.mp4` might contain an h264 video and an AAC audio stream. Demuxing it would create two files, one containing only video, one only audio. Both of these files would be exact copies of the stream in the container (no generation loss):
  * `somevideo.h264` - Only video
  * `somevideo.aac` - Only audio
* **Muxing** - Combining individual stream files into a single container file. In the example above, `somevideo.h264` and `somevideo.aac` would be combined together into a file called `somevideo.mp4`. That file would contain full video and audio tracks. Again, because there is no transcoding happening, there is no loss in quality when doing this.
* **Remuxing** - Sometimes referred to as "converting container format". This means passing an exact copy of the streams through to a new container. Because nothing was transcoded, there is no loss in quality, and remuxing a 2-hour movie takes minutes not hours.

**So remuxing is always preferred to transcoding.**  It's an order of magnitude faster, you leave the streams untouched, and avoid the generation-loss associated with transcoding.

## What Apple TV Supports

There are some others, but the core ones we care about are:

* **Containers** - MP4
* **Video Codecs** - h264
* **Audio Codecs** - AAC, AC-3 (via passthrough)

## Container

Most downloaded videos come in an MP4 container or perhaps AVI, MOV, or MKV (Metroska).  MP4's can sometimes have an M4V file extension.  If the file is MP4, M4V, or MOV, it can be dropped directly into iTunes, **provided its audio stream is AAC or AC3**.  More on that very important point in a sec.

## Video Stream

Nearly every video you download from the Internet, not matter what the container, has an h264 video stream in it.  h264 is fully compatible with Apple TV.  99% of the time, you can simply remux to MP4 very quickly without incurring a massively long transcode of the video stream.  If it came as an MP4, you can leave it MP4, again provided the audio stream is compatible.

## Audio Stream

Audio is the area from which the majority of problems arise.  People often report problems importing h264 video into iTunes for Apple TV playback and, in most cases, it is because of an incompatible audio stream or an incorrect Dolby Digital setting in Apple TV.  You'll see reports such as, "I imported an h264 MOV into iTunes and it's not working on Apple TV! I don't get any sound!  I thought Apple TV supported h264.  And MOV is Apple's own format!"

Correct, MOV _is_ Apple's own format, and h264 is very much supported on Apple TV.  It's not the MOV that is incompatible, nor is it the h264 video stream.  **It is the audio stream inside the MOV that is incompatible.**  Only AC-3 and AAC audio codecs are supported by Apple TV, but there is a "gotcha" with AAC and 5.1 sound.

### The DTS Problem

I see many videos, especially MKVs (Metroska video), coming with a DTS 5.1 soundtrack.  DTS is not compatible with Apple TV because the MP4 container does not support DTS, and therefore Apple TV doesn't support it.  Most conversion (remuxing) software will display an error when you try to remux a video with DTS to MP4.  To get video with DTS into iTunes and Apple TV, its audio stream must be transcoded to AC-3 or AAC.

### The AAC Problem

If you are like me, you connected Apple TV to your reciever using solely an HDMI cable.  True, there is a TOSLINK (optical) output on the back of the Apple TV, but my logical thought was, "OK, TOSLINK doesn't apply to my setup.  HDMI is capable of carrying all kinds of multichannel digital audio, right?  One world, one cable."  I went ahead using only the HDMI cable.

My second logical thought was, "I'll see if I can center my movie library around 5.1 AAC audio, it being the newer codec than AC-3."

With 5.1 AAC videos over HDMI, I quicky discovered that only had 2 audio channels coming out of my 7.1 surround system.  (*gasp!*)

Though trial and error, I found that I could get 5.1 sound to play if I:

1. Transcoded to AC-3 5.1 audio (Dolby Digital).
2. Used a TOSLINK cable between my Apple TV and my receiver.

Number 2 wasn't an option for me because my receiver does not allow you to select a different, non-HDMI audio source while watching HDMI.

In summary, Apple TV comes pre-configured like this:

* **AAC 5.1** - Decoded in the Apple TV:
  * **HDMI** - Only 2 channels sent to reciever.
  * **TOSLINK** - Full 5.1 sent to receiver.
* **AC-3 5.1** - NOT decoded in the Apple TV:
  * **HDMI** - Full 5.1 sent to receiver via "Pass Thru".
  * **TOSLINK** - Full 5.1 sent to receiver via "Pass Thru".

"Pass Thru", under the AC-3 bullet above, means that the audio stream is not decoded within Apple TV.  Your reciver must be able to decode AC-3.  AC-3 is a backcronym for "Dolby Digital", which was invented in the 90's.  Any reciever manufactured in the last 10 or 15 years has support for Dolby Digital.

The Apple TV, by default, will only send 2 of the 6 channels of a video's AAC audio over HDMI.  So I began standardizing on AC-3 5.1 soundtracks until I discovered the magic Apple TV setting:

### The Solution: The Magic Setting

1. Turn "Dolby Digital" to On.  In other words, the setting mentioned in this [Apple TV support article](http://support.apple.com/kb/TS3518).

Now the 5.1 soundtracks in my AAC videos were finally audible!  And so are AC-3!

Right now, you're thinking, "Why would a setting called 'Dolby Digital' have anything to do with the non-Dolby codec, AAC?"

I now know that this setting's _actual_ function is, "It's OK to send 5.1 over HDMI," despite its Dolby Digital name.  During testing, there could have been some fringe issues with 5.1 AAC over some older HDMI setups or versions, like static or no sound as the above support article indicates.  Apple probably opted for the safer 2-channel default because "audio not coming out my back speakers is better than static coming out of all of them".

To us audio geeks, the option is probably better called, "Send 5.1 audio over HDMI", but that is far more cryptic to the average user.  The average user simply knows the "Dolby Digital" brand to mean "good sound" or "surround sound".  Apple, following the rules of good User Experience design, eschews as best they can acronyms and abbreviations.  They mean nothing to most users, so in using them, you communicate nothing to most of your audience.  I can see why this decision was made.

## Tools

### Conversion

#### MP4 Tools

I've had the best success with [MP4 Tools](http://www.emmgunn.com/mp4tools/mp4toolshome.html). It focuses on Apple TV and remuxing, although it will transcode too. It's free if you are OK with nag screens, or $5 to make those go away (which I did). A very small price for a great, easy-to-use tool that works.

1. Open your video with MP4 Tools. Go into the MP4 tab. (I don't use the "Quick" tab because I'm not familiar with what decisions it makes.)
2. Choose the "Apple TV" device in the lower right.  It will gray out settings that aren't compatible with Apple TV.
3. Check off the streams you want to include: Audio, Video, Subtitles.
4. Choose "Pass Thru" for Video. That will copy the h264 stream the new format. No quality loss.
5. Choose "Pass Thru" for Audio if it's already 5.1 AC-3 or AAC.
  * If "Pass Thru" is grayed out, choose AAC 5.1.
6. Choose "Mux (soft)" for subtitles. "Hard" will burn them in to the frames and cause a 2-hour-long transcode.
7. Leave everything else as is. Click "Convert".

Because we're remuxing, a 2-hour movie only take maybe 2 or 3 minutes. If the audio had to transcode, then only a few minutes more.

MP4 Tools leaves the individual video and audio stream files on your drive after it's done, and log files, in addition to the remuxed video.  I turn this feature off in Preferences so the software cleans up after itself, leaving only the remuxed video.

Soft subtitles sometimes don't work in ATV. Sometimes you have to burn them in. When you burn them in, "Pass Thru" video grays out. Of course, you have to transcode video to burn in subtitles (a several-hour process).  Tip: To see the Subtitles menu in Apple TV, hold down the Select button on the remote (the big round one in the middle). A subtitle-selection menu appears.

If "Header Compression" was used in an MKV, MP4 Tools will prompt you remux it away. Just say "Yes". It will create a new MKV file with Header Compression disabled. Simply run that one through MP4 Tools in the same way, again remuxing it so there is no quality loss. This is another area where this tool succeeds where others do not (FFmpeg).

You can basically stop here, and be on your way with high-quality 5.1 videos in iTunes and Apple TV.  But from here, you'll likely want to write full metadata into the file, including hi-res cover art, that will make your personally converted videos look just as fancy as the ones you downloaded from Apple. They'll appear in iTunes and ATV with all the nice metadata: Title, Synopsis, MPAA Rating, Cover Art, Director, Actors, Genre, etc.  What follows is a tool that does just that, as well as some other tools you should keep on hand.

### Metadata

How to make all your videos have that "nice-looking" metadata that shows up in iTunes and Apple TV:

* **[Subler](http://code.google.com/p/subler/)** - Subler has remuxing features, but it's primarily a metadata editor. It downloads the video's complete metadata from the TMDb and TVDB databases online, then writes that into your video file.
   * **Tip**: If Subler crashes upon Save, just relaunch it and Save the metadata again. It does very occasinally crash, but I haven't noticed that adversely affect the video files at all.

### "Seeing" the Streams

It's a good idea to keep some free software on-hand that allows you to view the stream data inside video containers.

* **[MediaInfo](http://mediainfo.sourceforge.net/)** - Peer into **all** of the metadata inside a video file. A keep the free command-line version of this app installed. Install [Homebrew](http://mxcl.github.com/homebrew/), then `brew install mediainfo`. There is also a GUI one in the App Store for a couple bucks.
* **[FFprobe](http://ffmpeg.org/)** - Also a simply install via Homebrew: `brew install ffmpeg`.
* **[VLC](http://www.videolan.org/vlc/)** - Press Command-I for "Video Information". Go into the "Codec Details" tab and you'll see the Video, Audio, and Subtitle streams.  Expand the arrow next to each of the streams to see more info, including the codec of each one.

### Other Conversion Tools

These tools can do both remuxing and transcoding, but I didn't get into them in this article for reasons listed:

* **[FFmpeg](http://ffmpeg.org/)** - FFmpeg is an enormously powerful command-line tool, and is one of my favorites.  It is absolutely capable of remuxing to Apple TV-compatible formats, but my goal with this article was to show some simple, GUI-based conversion tools, geared toward remuxing and Apple TV, that I could recommend to non-nerds. And FFmpeg sometimes has trouble remuxing MKV's when "Header Compression" was used in the MKV.
* **[iFFmpeg](http://www.iffmpeg.com/)** - A nice GUI wrapper for FFmpeg with some good, Apple-centric presets. Of course, FFmpeg's overwhelming array of settings and options bubbles up to this app. Great for learning FFmpeg, though, and discovering its secrets.
* **[VLC](http://www.videolan.org/vlc/)** - VLC does have some admirable transcoding and remuxing features, but being a media player, that's not its focus. It doesn't always succeed, or its resultant files don't import into iTunes. Although, I keep VLC installed at all times. It's an excellent media player that plays every format in the world.

### Transcoding Only: Last Resort

* **[HandBrake](http://handbrake.fr/)** - Handbrake is a great tool, but is strictly a transcoding app, i.e., lossy conversion. Unfortunately, it doesn't do straight remuxing. Exhaust your efforts first with the above tools before resorting to HandBrake. I often see folks recommending HandBrake to get things into iTunes. That is unfortunate because they are imposing unnecessary, 2-hour-long, quality-reducing transcodes on all of their videos.
